HW 03 - Road traffic accidents
================
Sarah Madison
7.13.22

## Load packages and data

``` r
library(tidyverse)
library(dsbox)
```

## Exercises

### Exercise 1

The dataset “accidents” has 768 rows.

### Exercise 2

Each row in the data set represents an individual traffic accident.

### Exercise 3

Remove this text, and add your answer for Exercise 3 here.

``` r
  accidents$day_type <- ifelse(accidents$day_of_week == "Thursday" |accidents$day_of_week == "Wednesday" |accidents$day_of_week == "Tuesday" |accidents$day_of_week == "Monday" |accidents$day_of_week == "Friday", "Weekday", "Weekend")
ggplot(accidents, aes(x = time, fill = severity)) + 
  geom_density(alpha = 0.5) + facet_grid(day_type ~.)
```

![](hw-03_files/figure-gfm/recreation%20of%20plot-1.png)<!-- -->

### Exercise 4

``` r
library(ggridges)
ggplot(accidents, aes(x = time, y = day_of_week, fill = day_of_week)) + 
  geom_density_ridges(alpha = 0.5) + facet_grid(severity ~.)
```

    ## Picking joint bandwidth of 12600

    ## Picking joint bandwidth of 9170

    ## Picking joint bandwidth of 5840

![](hw-03_files/figure-gfm/my%20own%20graph-1.png)<!-- -->

I know I used the same type of visualization plot here as above, but I
couldn’t find a better way to represent my variables… I created the
above visualization to depict traffic accident frequencies throughout
the day on different days of the week. I separated the graphs according
to seriousness of the accident. Before interpreting the visualization, I
need to point out something odd. The times range from -10:00:00 -
30:00:00. This is equivalent to 2:00 pm the previous day - 10:00 am the
following day.This is a bizarre range, but there are instances occurring
during those times. Consequently, these accidents are listed as
occurring on one day, but the timestamp indicates that they actually
occurred the previous or following day. I could have tried to select for
those instances and recode them into their correct day category then try
to cut the graph off somehow so that it only included the appropriate 24
hour period. I didn’t do this though because I don’t really know why
this odd thing is happening and I don’t want to incorrectly manipulate
the data. This is, however, a good example of data being wonky.

Anyways, the figure shows that fatal accidents only occurred on friday,
while serious and slight accidents occurred on all days of the week.
This is extremely interesting to me. What is even more interesting. If
you go by timestamp and time of day, you can see that actually many of
these accidents occurred on Thursday night as there is a spike in
frequency between -05:00:00 and 05:00:00. The majority of accidents
occurred between 10 am and 3 pm. I would have predicted that the
majority of the friday fatal accidents would be occurring late at night
while people are drinking and are fatigued from the long workweek.
Because the data does not actually reflect this prediction, it is
possible that people are more prepared to go out on Friday nights. They
don’t have work the next morning and they have planned well for their
evening adventures. On thursday night, alternatively, people are
scrambling to get home and get to bed and are pre-occupied with worries
of the following workday.

``` r
accidents %>% 
  dplyr::filter(severity =="Fatal") %>% 
  dplyr::filter(day_of_week != "Friday") %>%
  head()
```

    ## # A tibble: 2 × 32
    ##   id          easting northing longitude latitude police_force severity vehicles
    ##   <chr>         <dbl>    <dbl>     <dbl>    <dbl>        <dbl> <fct>       <dbl>
    ## 1 2018950000…  319970   671230     -3.28     55.9           95 Fatal           1
    ## 2 2018950001…  327690   668100     -3.16     55.9           95 Fatal           1
    ## # … with 24 more variables: casualties <dbl>, date <chr>, day_of_week <fct>,
    ## #   time <time>, district <dbl>, highway <chr>, first_road_class <fct>,
    ## #   first_road_number <chr>, road_type <fct>, speed_limit <dbl>,
    ## #   junction_detail <chr>, junction_control <chr>, second_road_class <chr>,
    ## #   second_road_number <chr>, ped_cross_human <chr>, ped_cross_physical <chr>,
    ## #   light <fct>, weather <fct>, road_surface <fct>, special_condition <fct>,
    ## #   hazard <fct>, urban_rural <dbl>, police <chr>, day_type <chr>
